docs: add use case page for KEDA (#3349)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/docs/use-cases/keda.md

---
comments: true
---

# Scaling Workloads with KEDA based on Keptn metrics

If you want to use [KEDA](https://keda.sh/) to scale your workloads, you can set it up
to consume metrics from Keptn.
This gives you great flexibility for your setup since Keptn can
consolidate different observability providers for you and KEDA
will simplify the scaling operations for you.

This use case is enabled by the

> [Custom Metrics API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/external-api/custom-metrics.v1beta2/)

Reviewer: Since for  Keda  we are directly using the metrics endpoint of Keptn (e.g. http://metrics-operator-service.keptn-system.svc.cluster.local:9999/api/v1/metrics/podtato-kubectl/cpu-throttling), i think we can leave out the mentioning of the Kubernetes API extension, to avoid confusion

Author: hmm good point, i'll try to rewrite it a bit

Author: done

> [custom API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/external-api/custom-metrics.v1beta2/)

Reviewer 2: Don't you mean the Kubernetes Custom Metrics -- that's where the link goes.  And shouldn't the text for the link match the title of the target page?

Author: done

that the Keptn Metrics Operator provides.

## Before you begin

For this use case presentation, a few components need to be deployed to the
cluster in order to have a full setup:

> - Keptn Metrics Operator: Will be used for metrics consolidation.

Reviewer 2: Should this (or maybe the first mention of the Keptn Metrics Operator on the page) link to the "Components" page?  If I am a KEDA user who is new to Keptn, I have no idea what this is.

Author: done

    For more information about installation please refer to the
    [installation guide](../installation/index.md).

    > The Keptn Lifecycle Operator does not need to be installed for this use-case.

- [KEDA](https://keda.sh/): Will be used for scaling.
- [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/): Will be used as metrics provider.
  
    For more information about how to install Prometheus into your cluster, please

>     refer to the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/).

Reviewer 2: Should menion that they also need a `KeptnMetricsProvider` resource defined.  Maybe a reference to the "Keptn Metrics" guide chapter?

Author: the provider will set up later in the page and is not a prerequisite

## Deploy sample application

First, we need to deploy our application to the cluster.
For this we are going to
use a single service `podtato-head` application.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD046 -->

=== "deployment.yaml"

    ```yaml
    {% include "./assets/keda/sample-app.yaml" %}
    ```

=== "service.yaml"

    ```yaml
    {% include "./assets/keda/sample-service.yaml" %}
    ```

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD046 -->

Please create a `podtato-kubectl` namespace and apply the above manifests
to your cluster and continue with the next steps.

> After applying, please make sure that the application is up and running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After applying, use the following command to ensure that the application is up and running:
```

Author: done

```shell
$ kubectl get pods -n podtato-kubectl
podtato-head-entry-58d6485d9b-ld9x2         1/1     Running     (2m ago)
```

## Create KeptnMetric and KeptnMetricsProvider custom resources

To be able to react on the metrics of our application, we need to create

> `KeptnMetrics` and `KeptnMetricsProvider` custom resources.

Reviewer 2: It might be nice to have these link to the CRD ref pages if they want to look up the syntax while looking at the examples.

Author: i will link the first occurrence

These metrics are
exposed via the Keptn Metrics Operator, which gives us the possibility to configure
KEDA to react on the values of these metrics:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD046 -->

=== "KeptnMetric"

    ```yaml
    {% include "./assets/keda/keptnmetric.yaml" %}
    ```

=== "KeptnMetricsProvider"

    ```yaml
    {% include "./assets/keda/keptnmetricsprovider.yaml" %}
    ```

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD046 -->

For more information about the `KeptnMetric` and `KeptnMetricsProvider` custom resources,
please refer to the [CRD documentation](../reference/api-reference/metrics/v1/index.md).

After a few seconds we should be able to see values for the `cpu-throttling` metric:

> ```shell

Reviewer 3: let's try to put this to a separate file

$ kubectl describe  keptnmetrics.metrics.keptn.sh cpu-throttling -n podtato-kubectl
Name:         cpu-throttling
Namespace:    podtato-kubectl
API Version:  metrics.keptn.sh/v1
Kind:         KeptnMetric
Spec:
  Fetch Interval Seconds:  60
  Provider:
    Name:  prometheus-provider
  Query:  avg(rate(container_cpu_cfs_throttled_seconds_total{container="server", namespace="podtato-kubectl"}))
Status:
  Raw Value: <omitted for readability>
  Value:         4.53
```

Here we can see that the value of the `cpu-throttling` metric is `4.53`

## Set up the KEDA ScaledObject

Now that we are able to retrieve the value of our metric, and have it stored in
our cluster in the status of our `KeptnMetric` custom resource, we can configure
a `ScaledObject` to make use of this information in KEDA and therefore scale
our application automatically:

```yaml
{% include "./assets/keda/scaledobject.yaml" %}
```

As we can see in this example, by setting the `url` field,
we are now referring to the `KeptnMetric` and fetch it from the
Keptn Metrics Operator.

> KEDA will scale up our application, until our target value or `1` is reached,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
KEDA will scale up our application, until our target value of `1` is reached,
```

or we hit the maximum number of replicas which is `3` in this example.

If the load of the application is high enough, we will be able to see
the automatic scaling of our application:

```shell

> $ kubectl describe scaledobject -n podtato-kubectl my-scaledobject

Reviewer 3: let's try to put this to a separate file

Author: done

  Health:
    s0-metric-api-value:
      Number Of Failures:  0
      Status:              Happy
  Hpa Name:                keda-hpa-test-scaledobject
  Last Active Time:        2024-03-26T09:36:36Z
  Original Replica Count:  1
  Scale Target GVKR:
    Group:            apps
    Kind:             Deployment
    Resource:         deployments
    Version:          v1
  Scale Target Kind:  apps/v1.Deployment
Events:
  Type     Reason              Age                From           Message
  ----     ------              ----               ----           -------
  Normal   KEDAScalersStarted  63s                keda-operator  Started scalers watch
  Normal   ScaledObjectReady   63s                keda-operator  ScaledObject is ready for scaling
  Warning  KEDAScalerFailed    33s (x2 over 63s)  keda-operator  error requesting metrics endpoint: valueLocation must point to value of type number or a string representing a Quantity got: ''
  Normal   KEDAScalersStarted  18s (x5 over 63s)  keda-operator  Scaler metrics-api is built.
```

If we retrieve the pods of our application, we can see that, instead of
a single instance at the beginning, there are currently 3 instances running:

```shell

> $ kubectl get pods -n podtato-kubectl

Reviewer 3: let's try to put this to a separate file

Author: done
